%%<!-- -*- mode: text; -*- -->
%%Copyright (c) 2017 Yuchen Pei (me at ypei dot me)
%%Licensed under CC-BY-SA 4.0
%title Dynamics of type-A Pitman's transform
%date 2017-06-23

:pitman_transform:robinson_schensted:local_time:robinson_schensted_knuth:

In this article we derive the dynamical equations for the [[pitman_transform_type_a|Pitman's transform of type A]].
This derivation is not very useful due to the "niceness" assumption.
It is more of a proof of concept.
Related readings include [{warren07}] and [{oconnell12a}].

For paths $A$, let $L_A$ be the time $A$ spends at $0$:
{{$
L_A(t) = \int_0^t 1_{A(s) = 0} ds.
}}$
It is similar to local time, except the latter is the time $A$ spends *near* some point ($0$ here).
Also we only consider deterministic paths in this article, as opposed to local time which is usually considered with respect to stochastic processes.
For $A$ with good regularities, $L_A$ and the local time should be the same.

*Claim*. Given paths $S_1, S_2, ...$ that are "nice" enough, and let $(\lambda^k_j)_{1 \le j \le k}$ be the output after applying Pitman's transform (column insertion) to the $S$'s.
Then
{{$%align%
d \lambda^1_1 &= d S_1 \\
d \lambda^k_1 &= d \lambda^{k - 1}_1 + d L_{\lambda^{k - 1}_1 - \lambda^k_2}, \qquad k > 1\\
d \lambda^k_k &= d S_k - d L_{\lambda^{k - 1}_{k - 1} - \lambda^k_k}, \qquad k > 1 \\
d \lambda^k_j &= d \lambda^{k - 1}_j + d L_{\lambda^{k - 1}_j - \lambda^k_{j + 1}} - d L_{\lambda^{k - 1}_{j - 1} - \lambda^k_j} \qquad 1 < j < k
}}$

To prove the Claim, we use a lemma.

*Lemma*. For paths $A, B$ that are "nice" enough we have
{{$%align%
d A \otimes B &= d B - d L_{A \otimes B - A} \\
d A \odot B &= d B + d L_{A - A \odot B}
}}$

*Proof*. We show the formula for $A \otimes B$, as $A \odot B$ is similar.
Recall
{{$
A \otimes B (t) = B(t) - \sup_{0 \le s \le t} \{B(s) - A(s)\}
}}$
and hence
{{$
(A \otimes B - A) (t) = (B - A)(t) - \sup_{0 \le s \le t} \{B(s) - A(s)\}
}}$
so it suffices to show that
{{$
d M(t) = d L_{M - C}(t) \qquad (1)
}}$
where $C = B - A$ and $M(t) = \sup_{0 \le s \le t} C(s)$.

*Now we use the assumption of "nice"*. 
Suppose there does not exist an interval on which $C$ is constant.
Then we know that $M$ increases if and only if $C$ reaches $M$, which implies (1) and we are done. $\square$

*Proof* of Claim.
Recall from [[pitman_transform_type_a]] and the Corollary from [[rs_pitman_type_a]] that
{{$%align%
\mu^k_k &= S_k\\
\lambda^k_1 &= \mu^k_1 \\
(\lambda^k_j, \mu^k_{j - 1}) &= (\lambda^{k - 1}_{j - 1} \otimes \mu^k_j, \mu^k_j \odot \lambda^{k - 1}_{j - 1}), \qquad j > 1. \\
\mu^k_j &= (\sum_{i = 1 : j} \lambda^k_i) - (\sum_{i = 1 : j - 1} \lambda^{k - 1}_i).
}}$

To derive equations for $\lambda^k_j$ we consider the four cases where $j = k = 1$, $j = 1 < k$, $j = k > 1$ or $1 < j < k$.
We use the Lemma repeatedly.
# $j = k = 1$.
  {{$
  d \lambda^1_1 = d \mu^1_1 = d S_1
  }}$
# $j = 1 < k$.
  {{$
  d \lambda^k_1 = d \mu^k_1 = d \mu^k_2 \odot \lambda^{k - 1}_1 = d \lambda^{k - 1}_1 - d L_{\mu^k_2 - \lambda^k_1} = d \lambda^{k - 1}_1 - d L_{\lambda^k_2 - \lambda^{k - 1}_1}
  }}$
# $j = k > 1$.
  {{$
  d \lambda^k_k = d \lambda^{k - 1}_{k - 1} \otimes \mu^k_k = d \mu^k_k - d L_{\lambda^k_k - \lambda^{k - 1}_{k - 1}} = d S_k - d L_{\lambda^k_k - \lambda^{k - 1}_{k - 1}}
  }}$
# $1 < j < k$.
  {{$
  d \lambda^k_j = d \lambda^{k - 1}_{j - 1} \otimes \mu^k_j = d \mu^k_j - d L_{\lambda^k_j - \lambda^{k - 1}_{j - 1}}
  }}$
  where we then use
  {{$
  d \mu^k_j = d \mu^k_{j + 1} \odot \lambda^{k - 1}_j = d \lambda^{k - 1}_j + d L_{\mu^k_{j + 1} - \mu^k_j}
  }}$
  where we then use
  {{$
  \mu^k_{j + 1} - \mu^k_j = \lambda^k_{j + 1} - \lambda^{k - 1}_j
  }}$
$\square$

The equation for the row insertion transform is similar:
{{$%align%
d \lambda^1_1 &= d S_1 \\
d \lambda^k_1 &= d S_k + d L_{\lambda^{k - 1}_1 - \lambda^k_1}, \qquad k > 1 \\
d \lambda^k_k &= d \lambda^{k - 1}_{k - 1} - d L_{\lambda^{k - 1}_{k - 1} - \lambda^k_{k - 1}}, \qquad k > 1 \\
d \lambda^k_j &= d \lambda^{k - 1}_{j - 1} - d L_{\lambda^{k - 1}_{j - 1} - \lambda^k_{j - 1}} + d L_{\lambda^{k - 1}_j - \lambda^k_j}. \qquad 1 < j < k
}}$

*Remark*. Again, by using the same involution as in [[pitman_transform_type_a#Remark|Pitman's transform of type A]], the symmetry between row and column insertion is crystal clear.
