%%<!-- -*- mode: text; -*- -->
%%Copyright (c) 2017 Yuchen Pei (me at ypei dot me)
%%Licensed under CC-BY-SA 4.0

%title Markov function theorem
%date 2017-04-26
:markov_function_theorem:intertwining_relation:

The Markov function theorem can be found in [{rogers-pitman81}].

== Definitions and proof ==
*Theorem*([[stochastic_processes|discrete time discrete space version]] of Markov function theorem). Let $X$ be a Markov process with transition kernel $P$ on state space $S$, $f : S \to T$ for some space $T$, and $Y$ a process on space $T$ defined by $Y_t = f(X_t)$ for some $f$. 
If there is a kernel $K: T \times S \to [0, 1]$ such that 

# $K(y, x) = 0 \forall x \notin f^{-1}(y)$
# $\sum_{x \in S} K(y, x) = 1 \forall y \in T$. 

Then if stochastic matrix $Q: T \times T \to [0,1]$ satisfies the intertwining relation
{{$
 Q K = K P \qquad (1)
}}$
then if $X_0 \sim K(Y_0, \cdot)$ then 
* $Y$ evolves as a Markov chain with kernel $Q$.
* $\prob(X_n = x|Y_n = y, Y_{n - 1}, ..., Y_0) = K(y, x)$.

*Remark*. Condition 1 means $(K(y, \cdot))_y$ has disjoint supports $f^{-1}(y)$. Therefore the LHS of of (1) has only one term and (1) becomes
{{$
Q(y, f(x')) K(f(x'), x') = \sum_{x \in f^{-1}(y)} K(y, x) P(x, x').
}}$
The intertwining relation (1) is the most important part of the theorem.
Once it is verified, the results of the theorem should follow.

*Proof*. Let $y_{0: n} \subset T$. Denote $A_k := f^{- 1} (y_k)$.
{{$%align%
 \mathbb P_{Y_0 = y_0} (Y_{0: n} = y_{0: n}) &= \mathbb P_{X_0 \sim K(y_0, \cdot)} (X_0 \in A_0, X_1 \in A_1, ..., X_n \in A_n) \\
&= \sum_{x_{0: n} \in A_{0: n}} K(y_0, x_0) P(x_0, x_1) P(x_1, x_2) ... P(x_{n - 1}, x_n)\\
&= \sum_{y_1' \in T, x_{1: n} \in A_{1: n}} Q(y_0, y_1') K(y_1', x_1) P(x_1, x_2) ... P(x_{n - 1}, x_n) \\
&\overset{\dagger}{=} \sum_{x_{1: n} \in A_{1: n}} Q(y_0, y_1) K(y_1, x_1) P(x_1, x_2) ... P(x_{n - 1}, x_n)\\
&= ... = \sum_{x_n \in A_n} Q(y_0, y_1) Q(y_1, y_2) ... Q(y_{n - 1}, y_n) K(y_n, x_n) \\
&\overset{\dagger\dagger}{=} Q(y_0, y_1) Q(y_1, y_2) ... Q(y_{n - 1}, y_n).
}}$
where $\dagger$ and $\dagger\dagger$ we use the first and second conditions respectively.
Therefore $Y$ is a Markov process with transition kernel $Q$. The proof for the continuous case should be the same.  $\square$

Both assumptions that $X$ and $Y$ are probabilistic, as well as the positivity of $K$ can be relaxed, if we only focus on the algebraic structure.

%%* [ ]  What is the algebraic structure anyway?

For continuous-time Markov processes / chains besides the transition kernel there are also generators, and we have a corresponding version of the Markov function theorem as well.

*Theorem*(continuous-time version of the Markov function theorem). Let $X$ be a Markov process with generator $L^X$ on space $S$, and $Y$ a process on $T$ where $Y_t = f(X_t)$ for some $f$. If there is a kernel $K: T \times S \to [0, 1]$ such that 
# $K(y, x) = 0 \forall x \notin f^{-1}(y)$ 
# $\int K(y, x) dx = 1$ for all $y \in T$ 
Then if Markov generator $L^Y$ satisfies the intertwining relation
{{$
 K L^X = L^Y K
}}$
then $Y$ is Markov with generator $L^Y$.

== Relation between the continuous and discrete Markov chain versions ==
This bit is not verified by many examples. But just the RSK.

Suppose we have [[markov|continuous-time Markov chains]] $\hat X$ and $\hat Y$ with generator $\hat P$ and $\hat Q$, and their embedded discrete-time chains $X$ and $Y$ with transition matrices $P$ and $Q$, such that
{{$
 P(x, x') = \begin{cases}
- {\hat P(x, x') \over \hat P(x, x)}, & x \neq x' \\
0, &x = x'
\end{cases};\qquad
Q(x, x') = \begin{cases}
- {\hat Q(x, x') \over \hat Q(x, x)}, & x \neq x' \\
0, &x = x'
\end{cases}
}}$

In one case we can say that $P$ and $Q$ intertwines with $K$ iff $\hat P$ and $\hat Q$ with the same kernel.

*Claim*. Assuming the following is satisfied:
# $\hat P(x, x) = \hat Q(y, y) = c \forall x, y$
# $\hat P(x, x') = 0$ whenever $f(x) = f(x')$ and $x \neq x'$,
then
{{$
 \hat Q K = K \hat P \Leftrightarrow Q K = K P.
}}$

*Proof*. Quite straightforward. Consider the cases $y = y'$ and $y \neq y'$ separately. $\square$

This Claim allows us to verify the intertwining relations of the embedded chains. One example are the RS models, where the continuous-time version has an input of $\ell$ Poisson processes, and $X, Y$ are two levels of shapes $(\lambda^{\ell - 1}, \lambda^\ell), \lambda^\ell$. 
The two conditions correspond to
# The total rate of change of $X$ and $Y$ are the sum of rates of the input Poisson processes
# Whenever $\lambda^{\ell - 1}$ changes the next level changes as well

