%%<!-- -*- mode: text; -*- -->
%%Copyright (c) 2017 Yuchen Pei (me at ypei dot me)
%%Licensed under CC-BY-SA 4.0
%title Markov-Doob integrable dynamics on triangular arrays
%date 2017-05-16

:markov_doob_integrability:

We give a classification of dynamics on the triangular array that are [[markov_doob_integrability_triangular_array|Markov-Doob integrable]] here.

We consider four parameters with their possible values in braces:
* *Space*: The triangular array may be on a discrete space (d) e.g. $\pint$, or continuous space (c) e.g. $\real_+$.
* *Type*: The dynamics might be [[rsk_type_dynamics|RSK-type]] (r), which is weight preserving, or Warren-type (w).
* *Function*: The special harmonic function $h$ may be the Schur polynomials (s), the $q$-Whittaker functions (q), the Macdonald polynomials (m), or the Whittaker functions (w).
* *Special*: And the functions may have specialisations, including the usual specialisation / usual-spec (u), the dual specialisation / dual-spec (d), or the exponential specialisation / exp-spec (e).

So in total the possibile dynamics are quadruples in {d, c} x {r, w} x {s, q, m, w} x {u, d, e}, ranging 48 possibilities!
We write these quadruples in shorthand. E.g. crwe stands for Continuous-time RSK-type $h$-being-Whittaker-functions with Exponential-specialisations dynamics.
We also use "." as a wildcard.

*Remark 1*. The RSK-type dynamics can further split into row- and column- insertions. However we do not consider them separately, because they are dual to each other in a rather trivial sense in Schur and Whittaker cases.

*Remark 1.5*. Both the Schur and $q$-Whittaker functions are special cases of the Macdonald polynomials, but we do not neglect the former two because
1. Macdonald-related dynamics are still open
2. The Schur cases are less messy than the $q$-case, and have their own merits. This is also the reason we do not neglect Whittaker-related dynamics even though they are limits of the $q$-cases.

Let us list all the combinations (?: open; x: likely nonexistent; -: may be out there somewhere):

| SpaceTypeFunctionSpecial | name of the dynamics          | Markov-Doob integrability shown in...        |
|--------------------------|-------------------------------|----------------------------------------------|
| drsu                     | RSK correspondence            | [{oconnell03a}]                              |
| drsd                     | dual RSK correspondence       | \/                                           |
| drse                     | RS correspondence             | \/                                           |
| drqu                     | $q$RSK algorithm              | [{matveev-petrov15}] [{pei16}] [0]           |
| drqd                     | dual $q$RSK algorithm         | [{matveev-petrov15}]                         |
| drqe                     | $q$RS algorithm               | [{oconnell-pei13}] [{borodin-petrov13}]      |
| ..m.                     | ?                             | ?                                            |
| d.w.                     | x [1]                         | x                                            |
| crsu                     | DLPP with exponential weights | [{dieker-warren09}]                          |
| crsd                     | -                             | -                                            |
| crse                     | type-A Pitman's transform     | [{oconnell03b}]                              |
| c.q.                     | x [2]                         | x                                            |
| crwu                     | gRSK algorithm                | [{corwin-oconnell-seppalainen-zygouras14}]   |
| crwd                     | -                             | -                                            |
| crwe                     | semi-discrete polymer         | [{oconnell12a}]                              |
| dwsu                     | push-block                    | [{warren-windridge09}]                       |
| dwsd                     | -                             | -                                            |
| dwse                     | push-block                    | [{warren-windridge09}] [{borodin-ferrari14}] |
| dwqu                     | usual-spec $q$push-block      | [{matveev-petrov15}]                         |
| dwqd                     | dual-spec $q$push-block       | \/                                           |
| dwqe                     | exp-spec $q$push-block        | [{borodin-corwin14}]                         |
| cwsu                     | - [3]                         | -                                            |
| cwsd                     | -                             | -                                            |
| cwse                     | Warren process                | [{warren07}]                                 |

%%TODO: looks like only 45 out of the 48 cases are covered here... needs double checking.

*Remark 2*. The [[markov_doob_integrability_triangular_array|Markov-Doob integrability]] given Space, Function, and Special has the same statement with the same transition kernels of the shape. Therefore for any x, y and z, the combination xryz and xwyz yield the same Corollary [[markov_doob_integrability_triangular_array|there]].

[0]. In [{pei16}] [[macdonald_rsk_local_move_integrability|Local move integrability]] of the $q$RSK was shown, which turns out to be [[equivalence_m_rsk_md_lm_integrabilities|equivalent to the Markov-Doob integrability]].

[1]. Not likely to exist because the Whittaker functions are usually defined on continuous space.

[2]. Not likely to exist becasue need to find a continuous version of the $q$-Geometric distribution, which is weird.

[3]. TODO: Is this the Laguerre Warren process in [{sun16}]?
