:q_analogs:q_pochhammers:q_binomial_coefficients:q_vandermonde_chu_identity:

%title $q$-Pochhammers
%%q-binomial coefficients
%%q-deformed distributions
%%q-CCR
%%q-Catalan
%%formula 2
%%formula binomial inversion q
== $q$-Pochhammers ==
By [{gasper-rahman04}],
for $n \in \mathbb Z$ define
{{$
(a)_n := (a; q)_n :=
\begin{cases}
(1 - a) (1 - a q) ... (1 - a q^{n - 1}) & n > 0 \\
1 & n = 0 \\
{1 \over (1 - a q^{-1}) (1 - a q^{-2}) ... (1 - a q^{-n})} & n < 0
\end{cases}
}}$

Thus for $n < 0$
{{$
(q)_n = \infty \qquad (1)
}}$ 

$\phi(q) := (q)_\infty$ is called Euler's function.

== $q$-binomial coefficients ==
For $n \ge 0$ define the $q$-binomial coefficients ${n \choose k}_q$ by
{{$
{n \choose k}_q = {(n)_q \over (k)_q (n - k)_q} \qquad (2)
}}$
Thus by (1) when $k < 0$ or $k > n$, ${n \choose k}_q = 0$.

*Claim 1*. $\sum_{\lambda \subset n^k} q^{|\lambda|} = {n + k \choose k}_q$

*Proof*. Denote the LHS by $F(n, k)$, then 
{{$
F(n, k) = F(n - 1, k) + q^n F(n, k - 1)
}}$
with $F(0, k) = F(n, 0) = 1$.
This recursive relation with the boundary conditions agree with those of the binomial coefficients.
$\square$

*Remark*. The Young diagrams confined in the $k \times n$ rectangle correspond to walks from $(0, 0)$ with $n$ ups and $k$ downs. Setting $q = 1$ in (2) this degenerates to the binomial coefficients as enumerations of such walks.

== Properties ==
# $(x; q^{-1})_n = (- 1)^n x^n q^{-{n \choose 2}} (x^{-1}; q)_n$
# $(q^{-n}; q)_k = {(n)_q \over (n - k)_q} (-1)^k q^{{k \choose 2} - n k}$
# ${n \choose k}_{q^{-1}} = q^{- n (n - k)} {n \choose k}_q$
# $(a)_{n - k} = {(a)_n \over (a^{-1} q^{1 - n})_k} (- q a^{-1})^k q^{{k \choose 2} - n k}$
# $(a^{-1} q^{1 - n})_n = (a)_n (-a)^{- n} q^{- {n \choose 2}}$

== Cauchy's $q$-binomial series ==

*Theorem*.
{{$
{}_1\phi_0(a;;q;z) = \sum_{k \ge 0} {(a)_k \over (q)_k} z^k = {(a z)_\infty \over (z)_\infty}. \qquad |q| < 1, |z| < 1. \qquad (3)
}}$

*Proof*.
{{$%align%
F(a, z) - F(a, q z) &= (1 - a) z F(a q, z)\\
F(a, z) - F(a q, z) &= - a z F(a q, z)
}}$
Eliminating $F(a q, z)$ we have
{{$
F(a, z) = {1 - a z \over 1 - z} F(a, q z).
}}$
Applying this recursively we have
{{$
F(a, z) = {(a z)_n \over (z)_n} F(a, q^n z).
}}$
Let $n \to \infty$ we have
{{$
F(a, z) = {(a z)_\infty \over (z)_\infty} F(a, 0) = {(a z)_\infty \over (z)_\infty}.
}}$
$\square$

== $q$-deformations of binomial theorem ==
=== Version 1 ===
Let $x, y$ be the generators of a $q$-Grassmann algebra, namely they satisfy
{{$
y x = q x y
}}$
*Theorem*. ${n \choose k}_q$ satisfies
{{$
(x + y)^n = \sum_k {n \choose k}_q x^k y^{n - k}
}}$
This is also called $q$-binomial theorem.

*Claim*. 
{{$
{n \choose k}_q = \sum_{S \in {[n] \choose k}} q^{\sum_{a_i \in S} (a_i - i)} = \sum_{S \in {[n] \choose k}} q^{(\sum_{a_i \in S} a_i) - {k + 1 \choose 2}}
}}$
Pf. We know by the previous thm ${n \choose k}_q$ gathers the products with $k$ $x$'s and $n - k$ $y$'s, and each of such product corresponds to $S = \{a_1 \le a_2 ... \le a_k\} \in {[n] \choose k}$ in a obvious way, e.g. when $n = 8$ and $k = 2$, $yyxyxyyy \leftrightarrow \{3, 5\}$. Shifting all the $x$'s to the left corresponds $\sum_i (a_i - i)$ shifts. $\square$

=== Version 2 ===
Another $q$-binomial theorem (a.k.a. Gauss binomial theorem) is
{{$
\sum_k q^{{k \choose 2}} \alpha^k {n \choose k}_q = (- \alpha; q)_n. \qquad (4)
}}$

*Proof 1*. Set $a := q^{- n}$ and $z = - \alpha q^n$ in (3) and simplify. $\square$

*Proof 2*. The RHS is
{{$
(1 + \alpha) (1 + \alpha q) ... (1 + \alpha q^{n - 1})
}}$
The coefficient of $\alpha^k$ enumerates the partitions of $k$ distinct parts (with the possibility that the last part is $0$) and first part $\le n - 1$, and that by removing $0$ from the last part, $1$ from the second last part, ... $k - 1$ from the first part, we have partitions with length $\le k$ and first part $\le n - k$. Finally applying Claim 1 we arrive at the conclusion:
{{$%align%
(1 + \alpha) &(1 + \alpha q) ... (1 + \alpha q^{n - 1}) \\
&= \sum_k \sum_{\lambda: \ell(\lambda) = k, \lambda_1 \le n - 1, \lambda_1 > \lambda_2 > ... > \lambda_k \ge 0} \alpha^k q^{|\lambda|}\\
&= \sum_k \alpha^k q^{{k \choose 2}} \sum_{\mu: \ell(\mu) \le k, \mu_1 \le n - k} \\
&= \sum_k \alpha^k q^{{k \choose 2}} {n \choose k}_q.
}}$
$\square$

=== Version 3 ===
Yet a third $q$-deformation of the binomial theorem is as follows:
{{$
\sum_k b^k (a; q)_k (b; q)_{n - k} {n \choose k}_q = (a b; q)_n \qquad (5)
}}$
which when $q \to 1$ reads
{{$
\sum_k (b - a b)^k (1 - b)^{n - k} {n \choose k} = (1 - a b)^n.
}}$
see Exercise 1.3 on pp25 of [{gasper-rahman04}].

*Proof*. By (3)
{{$
\hg{1}{\phi}{0} (a; ; q, z) \hg{1}{\phi}{0} (b; ; q, a z)  = \hg{1}{\phi}{0} (a b; ; q, z).
}}$
Expanding both sides and compare coefficients of $z^n$ we are done.
$\square$

This is also called a $q$-Vandermonde-Chu identiy. It is used to define the $\phi_{q, \xi, \eta}$ distribution in [[q_hahn_process]]. As in the derivation of (4) using (3), (5) becomes (6) with certain parameters, see [[binomial_distribution]].

*Remark*. Using Item 4 in Properties the LHS of (5) can be written as
{{$
(b)_n \hg{2}{\phi}{1} (a, q^{- n}; b^{-1} q^{1 - n}; q, q)
}}$
and (5) can be derived using
{{$
\hg{2}{\phi}{1}(q^{- n}, b; c; q, q) = {(c / b)_n \over (c)_n} b^n. (5.5)
}}$
and Item 5 in Properties.

%%TODO: Add multinomial analogue of (5)

%%TODO: Check the relation between (5.5) and Heine's summation formula.
=== Version 4 ===
{{$
\sum_{k = 0}^n \alpha^k (\alpha; q)_{n - k} {n \choose k}_q = 1
}}$
When $q \to 1$ it reduces to the usual binomial theorem
{{$
\alpha^k (1 - \alpha)^{n - k} {n \choose k} = 1
}}$

%%TODO: Can this be extended to a $q$-analogue of $\sum_k a^k b^{n - k} {n \choose k} = (a + b)^n$?

== $q$-Vandermonde-Chu identity ==
See also [[binomial_distribution]].

{{$
\sum_s q^{(m_1 - s) (k - s)} {m_1 \choose s}_q {m_2 \choose k - s}_q = {m_1 + m_2 \choose k}_q. \qquad (6)
}}$

*Proof 1*.
{{$
(- x)_{m_1 + m_2} = (- x)_{m_1} (- x q^{m_1})_{m_2}.
}}$
Applying (4) to both sides of the above formula and gather the coefficients of $x^k$ we are done.
$\square$

*Proof 2*. Applying (5.5) with $n = m_1, b = q^{- k}, c = q^{m_2 - k + 1}$. $\square$

== Classical limits of $q$-Pochhammers ==
In the following let $q = e^{- \epsilon}$.
=== quantum dilogarithm ===
For $t > 0$
{{$
(q^t; q)_\infty = \Gamma(t)^{-1} \exp(A(\epsilon) + (1 - t) \log \epsilon + O(\epsilon)) 
}}$
where $A(\epsilon)$ is defined as
{{$
A(\epsilon) = - {\pi^2 \over 6 \epsilon} - {1 \over 2} \log {\epsilon \over 2\pi}
}}$

Specifically, when $t = 0$ we have asymptotics for Euler's function:
{{$
\phi(q) = \exp(A(\epsilon) + O(\epsilon))
}}$

This can be derived for example from Thm3.2 of [{banerjee-wilkerson16}].

Hence
{{$
(n)_q = \Gamma(n + 1)^{-1} \epsilon^{- n} \exp(O(\epsilon))
}}$

=== Another classical limit ===
in Lemma 3.1 in [{gerasimov-lebedev-oblezin12}]:

*Lemma 3.1*. For $\alpha \ge 1$, 
{{$
(\alpha \epsilon^{-1} \log \epsilon^{-1} + \epsilon^{-1} y)_q = 
\begin{cases}
e^{A(\epsilon) + e^{- y} + O(\epsilon)} & \alpha = 1 \\
e^{A(\epsilon) + O(\epsilon)} & \alpha > 1
\end{cases}
}}$

%%TODO: relation to dilogarithm function.
