%%<!-- -*- mode: text; -*- -->
%%Copyright (c) 2017 Yuchen Pei (me at ypei dot me)
%%Licensed under CC-BY-SA 4.0
%title Simple symmetric functions
%date 2017-04-25

Sym = symmetrisation
== Monomial ==
* $m_\lambda(x) = Sym(x_1^{\lambda_1} ... x_\ell^{\lambda_\ell})$


== Elementary ==
* $e_\lambda = \prod_{i = 1 : \ell} e_{\lambda_i}$
where
* $e_n(x) = Sym(x_1...x_n)$

Generating function:
{{$
E(t, x) = \prod_{1 \ge 1} (1 + t x_i)
}}$

== Complete homogenous ==
* $h_\lambda = \prod_{i = 1 : \ell} h_{\lambda_i}$
where
* $h_n(x) = \sum_{n_1 + ... + n_k = n} x^n$

generating function:
{{$
H(t, x) = \sum_{n \ge 0} t^n h_n(x) = \prod_{i \ge 1}{1 \over 1 - t x_i}.
}}$

== Relation between $e$ and $h$ ==
* $H(t) E(-t) = 1$
* so $\sum_{r = 0 : n} (-1)^r h_{n - r} e_r = 0$, i.e. $e_n = h_1 e_{n - 1} - h_2 e_{n - 2} + ...$.
* The above relation shows that homomorphism $\omega$ defined by $\omega (e_n) = h_n$ is an involution.
* $s_{(n)} = h_n$ and $s_{(n)'} = e_n$.

== Forgotten ==
Define $f_\lambda := \omega(m_\lambda)$, called the forgotten symmetric functions.

[{macdonald98}]: no simple direct description.

%%* [ ] Macdonald: no simple direct description. So what are some simple cases like $f_n$?

== Power sum ==
* $p_\lambda = \prod_{i = 1 : \ell} p_{\lambda_i}$
where
* $p_n(x) = Sym(x_1^n)$

Dirichlet generating function ([{sagan00}]):
{{$
\sum_{n \ge 1} p_n(x) {t^n \over n} = \log \prod_{i \ge 1} {1 \over 1 - x_i t} = \log H(t, x).
}}$

Generating function ([{macdonald98}]):
{{$%align%
P(t) = \sum_{r \ge 1} p_r t^{r - 1} = H'(t) / H(t).
P(-t) = E'(t) / E(t)
}}$

so
{{$%align%
n h_n = \sum_{r = 1 : n} p_r h_{n - r}\\
n e_n = \sum_{r = 1 : n} (-1)^{r - 1} p_r e_{n - r}
}}$
The second one above is Newton's formula.

So
{{$
\omega(p_n) = (-1)^{n - 1} p_n, \qquad \omega(p_\lambda) = (-1)^{|\lambda| - l(\lambda)} p_\lambda =: \epsilon_\lambda p_\lambda.
}}$
%%
%%Define for $\lambda$ a partition
%%{{$
%%z_\lambda = \prod_{i \ge 1} i^{m_i} m_i!
%%}}$
%%where $m_i$ is the number of parts of $\lambda$ equal to $i$, i.e. $m_i = \lambda'_i - \lambda'_{i + 1}$.
%%This definition is on page 24 of [{macdonald98}].
